Nonblocking Collectives (Draft) (#456)
openshmem-org/specification: content/shmem_alltoall_nb.tex

\apisummary{
  Exchanges a fixed amount of contiguous data blocks between all pairs

>   of \acp{PE} participating in the collective routine.

Reviewer: Since we mention later that "All PEs in the provided team must participate in the collective.", can we just say that here, instead of keeping it in the abstract? 
i.e. "Exchanges a fixed amount of contiguous data blocks between all PEs on the specified team."

\apiargument{IN}{nelems}{
  The number of elements to exchange for each \ac{PE}.
  For \FUNC{shmem\_alltoallmem\_nb}, elements are bytes;
  for \FUNC{shmem\_alltoall\{32,64\}\_nb}, elements are 4 or 8 bytes,
  respectively.
}
\apiargument{IN}{tag}{A user defined tag to order the collective operation;
SHMEM\_COLL\_UNORDERED can be provided if no order is required.}
\apiargument{OUT}{request}{An opaque request handle identifying the collective
operation.}

\end{apiarguments}

\apidescription{
    The \FUNC{shmem\_alltoall\_nb} routines are collective routines. All
    \acp{PE} in the provided team must participate in the collective. If
    \VAR{team} compares equal to \LibConstRef{SHMEM\_TEAM\_INVALID} or is
    otherwise invalid, the behavior is undefined.

    {\bf Invocation and completion}: A call to the nonblocking alltoall routine posts the operation and returns
    immediately without necessarily completing the operation. On the successful
    post of the operation, an opaque request handle is created and returned. The
    operation is completed after a call to \FUNC{shmem\_req\_test} or
    \FUNC{shmem\_req\_wait}. When the operation is complete, the request handle

>     is deallocated and cannot be reused.

Reviewer 2: To my understanding. This is currently worded in a way that both `shmem_req_test` and `shmem_req_wait` guarantee completion.

I believe the correct language exists in the intro on lines 17 and 18.

Reviewer 3: @kwaters4 line 17 and 18 of the intro (completion semantics) states:

``
\item Completion semantics:  \openshmem programs can learn the status of the collective operations
using the \FUNC{shmem\_req\_test} routine. The operation is completed after
a call to \FUNC{shmem\_req\_test} or a call to \FUNC{shmem\_req\_wait}.
``

This is the same as here other than the ability to observe the status of the collective. I believe the text you are quoting is older.

Reviewer 2: Maybe I misunderstand. 

I thought shmem_req_test only checks the status of the collective. but then the program continues even if the non-blocking call is incomplete. While shmem_req_wait waits and guarantees completion.

Reviewer 3: `shmem_req_test` checks for completion and if complete, will deallocate the request handle, set the handle to SHMEM_REQ_INVALID, and returns 0.

I feel like this wording may be the confusing part:

``
The operation is completed after a call to \FUNC{shmem\_req\_test} or a call to \FUNC{shmem\_req\_wait}.
``

Maybe this wording is more clear:
``
Completion of the operation can be observed through one or more calls to \FUNC{shmem\_req\_test} or a single call to \FUNC{shmem\_req\_wait}.
``

    \end{itemize}

    The data being sent and received are
    stored in a contiguous symmetric data object. The total size of each \ac{PE}'s
    \VAR{source} object and \VAR{dest} object is \VAR{nelems} times the size of
    an element
    times \VAR{N}, where \VAR{N} equals the number of \acp{PE} participating
    in the operation.
    The \VAR{source} object contains \VAR{N} blocks of data
    (where the size of each block is defined by \VAR{nelems}) and each block of data
    is sent to a different \ac{PE}.

    The same \dest{} and \source{}
    arrays, and same value for nelems
    must be passed by all \acp{PE} that participate in the collective.

    Given a \ac{PE} \VAR{i} that is the \kth \ac{PE}
    participating in the operation and a \ac{PE}
    \VAR{j} that is the \lth \ac{PE}
    participating in the operation,

    \ac{PE} \VAR{i} sends the \lth block of its \VAR{source} object to
    the \kth block of
    the \VAR{dest} object of \ac{PE} \VAR{j}.

    
    Like data exchange semantics, the entry and completion
    criteria of blocking and nonblocking alltoall is similar. 

>     {\bf Entry criteria}: Before any \ac{PE} calls a \FUNC{shmem\_alltoall\_nb} routine,

Reviewer 4: This entry criteria is confusing - if we have the same entry criteria as blocking operations - then the users are supposed to make sure the src/dst buffers are available at the point of entry - meaning the users are expected to sync with themselves before launching the nb collective operation.

AFAIU - the src/dst needs to be available when everyone in the team reaches the state - which can be determined during runtime - without the need for explicit sync before launching the nb collective operation.

Please clarify the intended semantics.

Author: Naveen, my intent is to keep it consistent with the semantics of blocking collectives. I wanted to improve the description. I don’t see how the current wording is violating that. If the wording doesn’t reflect that, then we can fix it.

    Given a \ac{PE} \VAR{i} that is the \kth \ac{PE}
    participating in the operation and a \ac{PE}
    \VAR{j} that is the \lth \ac{PE}
    participating in the operation,

    \ac{PE} \VAR{i} sends the \lth block of its \VAR{source} object to
    the \kth block of
    the \VAR{dest} object of \ac{PE} \VAR{j}.

    
    Like data exchange semantics, the entry and completion
    criteria of blocking and nonblocking alltoall are similar.

    {\bf Entry criteria}: Before any \ac{PE} calls a \FUNC{shmem\_alltoall\_nb} routine,
    the following condition must be ensured:
    \begin{itemize}
    \item The \VAR{dest} data object on all \acp{PE} in the team is
      ready to accept the \FUNC{shmem\_alltoall\_nb} data.
    \end{itemize}
    Otherwise, the behavior is undefined.

    {\bf Completion criteria}: Upon completion, the following is true for
    the local PE:
    \begin{itemize}
    \item Its \VAR{dest} symmetric data object is completely updated and
    the data has been copied out of the \VAR{source} data object.
    \end{itemize}
}

\apireturnvalues{
    Zero on successful local completion. Nonzero otherwise.
}

\begin{apiexamples}

\apicexample

>     {This \CorCpp{} example shows overlapping nonblocking \FUNC{shmem\_int64\_alltoall\_nb} on two 64-bit integers among all \acp{PE}.}

Reviewer 3: overlapping -> concurrent

*source, size_t nelems, shmem_req_h *request);
\end{C11synopsis}
where \TYPE{} is one of the standard \ac{RMA} types specified by Table \ref{stdrmatypes}.

\begin{Csynopsis}
\end{Csynopsis}
\begin{CsynopsisCol}
int @\FuncDecl{shmem\_\FuncParam{TYPENAME}\_alltoall\_nb}@(shmem_team_t team,
TYPE *dest, const TYPE *source, size_t nelems, shmem_req_h *request);
\end{CsynopsisCol}
where \TYPE{} is one of the standard \ac{RMA} types and has a corresponding \TYPENAME{} specified by Table \ref{stdrmatypes}.

\begin{CsynopsisCol}
int @\FuncDecl{shmem\_alltoall32\_nb}@(shmem_team_t team, void *dest, const
void *source, size_t nelems, shmem_req_h *request);

int @\FuncDecl{shmem\_alltoall64\_nb}@(shmem_team_t team, void *dest, const
void *source, size_t nelems, shmem_req_h *request);

int @\FuncDecl{shmem\_alltoallmem\_nb}@(shmem_team_t team, void *dest, const
void *source, size_t nelems, shmem_req_h *request);
\end{CsynopsisCol}

\begin{apiarguments}

\apiargument{IN}{team}{A valid \openshmem team handle to a team.}%

\apiargument{OUT}{dest}{Symmetric address of a data object large enough to receive
    the combined total of \VAR{nelems} elements from each \ac{PE} in the

>     active set.

Reviewer 5: ...in the "team"?

If so, we have the same wording in blocking alltoall.  So this was inherited :)

    The type of \dest{} should match that implied in the SYNOPSIS section.}
\apiargument{IN}{source}{Symmetric address of a data object that contains \VAR{nelems}
    elements of data for each \ac{PE} in the active set, ordered according to
    destination \ac{PE}.
    The type of \source{} should match that implied in the SYNOPSIS section.}
\apiargument{IN}{nelems}{
  The number of elements to exchange for each \ac{PE}.
  For \FUNC{shmem\_alltoallmem\_nb}, elements are bytes;
  for \FUNC{shmem\_alltoall\{32,64\}\_nb}, elements are 4 or 8 bytes,
  respectively.
}
\apiargument{OUT}{request}{An opaque request handle identifying the collective
operation.}

\end{apiarguments}

\apidescription{
    The \FUNC{shmem\_alltoall\_nb} routines are collective routines. All
    \acp{PE} in the provided team must participate in the collective. If
    \VAR{team} compares equal to \LibConstRef{SHMEM\_TEAM\_INVALID} or is
    otherwise invalid, the behavior is undefined.

>     {\bf Invocation and completion}: A call to the nonblocking alltoall routine posts the operation and returns
>     immediately without necessarily completing the operation. On the successful
>     post of the operation, an opaque request handle is created and returned. The

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
    {\bf Invocation and completion}: A call to the nonblocking alltoall routine initiates the operation and returns
    immediately without necessarily completing the operation. On success,
    an opaque request handle is created and returned. The
```
